---
layout: post
title:  [Programmers] 징검다리
category: Data structure & Algorithms
tags:
  - Data structure & Algorithms
  - Binary Search
---

## 징검다리
https://school.programmers.co.kr/learn/courses/30/lessons/43236

### Explanation
This was my first attempt at binary search on a question that is not as
simple as finding a value in a sorted list.

Binary search is basically guessing the answer value by putting your guess
as mid. There are 2 points you need to know. After sorting, we append the 
distance value, which is the final end because we are gonna calculate if 
we can reach that end from our previous prev_rock position.

Now we have guessed the minimum distance between rocks. Logically, if we
encounter a rock (current_rock) where the distance between current_rock and
prev_rock is **less than** what we have guessed for the minimum distance between
rocks, that logically doesn't make sense. Because that means our guess 
is invalid as there is a distance less than our guess. So we remove our current_rock
so that hopefully the next rock will have a greater distance from our 
prev_rock. But if distance between cur_rock and prev_rock is greater, that
is perfectly fine but we just need to set prev_rock as the current rock.

The second point that is **really** important is that notice I returned
start -1, not just start. start is the bare minimum value among the distances 
between stones when n stones are removed.

In the stone example, we return start - 1 because start represents the 
smallest distance that allows removing n rocks, so the maximum value for 
the minimum distance would be start - 1.


```python
def solution(distance, rocks, n):
    start=1
    end= distance
    rocks.sort()
    rocks.append(distance)
  
    while start<=end:
        mid = (end+start)//2
        count=0
        prev_rock=0
        for rock in rocks:
            if rock-prev_rock >=mid:
                prev_rock=rock
            else:
                count+=1
        if count>n:
            end=mid-1
        else:
            start=mid+1
  return start-1
```

