---
layout: post
title:  [Programmers] 선입 선출 스케줄링
category: Data structure & Algorithms
tags:
  - Data structure & Algorithms
  - Binary Search
---

## 선입 선출 스케줄링
https://school.programmers.co.kr/learn/courses/30/lessons/12920

### Explanation
Firstly, before we do anything, if n is less than length than length of cores, than
we can just return n. But the problem is finding when n is bigger and we have
to find the index. I think it is binary search but how do I know what to guess?
Surely I cannot guess the index?

In this example, what we need to guess is the hard part - we can guess 
the time for all n processes to be done. But how do we get the index then?
We get the time not when all n processes are done, but just 1 time frame back 
before. Then, for the last iteration, we iterate core by core for the 
remaining n jobs and find the index.

So in this example, which I took very long to understand, we can find 
the perfect minimum time that all cores can run and complete n tasks. But 
the question is not asking for the minimum time. We want to find the index 
of core that completes the last job. So we need to take a step back and 
go back 1 time frame back from that minimum time and see how many jobs
are completed up to 1 time frame before that minimum time. That is why 
we use start-1 to get the previous time and minus all the jobs that cores 
completed within that time. That will result in x remaining jobs to be 
completed left for the final iteration. We iterate manually through the 
index of cores for time frame = start (minimum time).  

When start%cores[i]==0, we decrement n by 1 and once n reaches 0, that 
is when that index of core will be the one that takes this job so return 
that index+1 (+1 cuz not 0-indexed). 

correct solution
```python

def solution(n, cores):
    if n <= len(cores):
        return n
    
    n -= len(cores)
    start = 1
    end = max(cores) * n
    while start<= end:
        mid = (start+end)//2
        jobs_completed = sum(mid//core for core in cores)
        if jobs_completed >=n:
            end=mid-1
        else:
            start = mid+1
        
    for core in cores:
        n-= (start-1)//core
    for i in range(len(cores)):
        if start%cores[i]==0:
            n-=1
            if n==0:
                return i+1
```
