---
date: 2022-04-17 14:35:23
layout: post
title: All about HTTP
subtitle: Internet Network
description: Internet network
image: https://res.cloudinary.com/dm7h7e8xj/image/upload/v1559825145/theme16_o0seet.jpg
optimized_image: https://res.cloudinary.com/dm7h7e8xj/image/upload/c_scale,w_380/v1559825145/theme16_o0seet.jpg
category: General Knowledge
tags:
  - General Knowledge
  
author: Jeonghwan Lee
---

1. Internet Network
    * IP protocol has several fall-offs. Even if the receiver is out of service or non-existent, the packet is still delivered. Also, packet might not be delivered in sequence as intended because it is too big and so it is cut into pieces and delivered separately. Also, in the middle of this packet delivery, some nodes might be closed so it may cause a loss of packet. Finally, if there are 2 applications using the same IP address, there is no way to differentiate the 2.

    * There is IP, TCP (3 way handshake), UDP

    * IP is hotel. Port is hotel room number.

    * DNS solves problems of remembering long IP addresses and when IP addresses change.

    * Uniform Resource Locator(URL) or Uniform Resource Name(URN)

    * URL is made up of scheme, user info(not rly used), host (either domain name or ip address), port, resource path (hierarchial structure), ?query parameter (in key-value format) and #fragment (normally in html).

2. HTTP basic

    * HyperText Transfer Protocol (HTTP) 

    * Stateless means server does not contain the client's condition/details at that point of time. Stateful is problem because each server serves a specific purpose and if one goes down, the others cannot serve the purpose that the down server was serving. Stateless is good for like when 6pm chicken discount even, thousands of people connect at same time. But still hard to resolve this issue so maybe display a static HTML page first for them to read and play around first before the event connect button.

    * Connectionless means cuts TCP/IP connection once client request has processed. But TCP/IP connections needs to be made again for another request, so extra time is taken for 3 way handshake. This is solved by HTTP Persistent Connections.

    * HTTP message is either request or response.

    * HTTP message structure is made up of start-line, header, empty line (CRLF) and message body.

    * For HTTP request by client, start-line is also called request-line. request-line = method + request-target (path) + HTTP version. 

    * HTTP methods - GET is searching or asking for resource in server while POST is giving some data to server for server to do something about it. 

    * Path, or absolute path, starts with / (backslash) right after the HTTP methods. absolute-path?query

    * For HTTP response by server, start-line is called status-line. status-line = HTTP-version + space + status-code + space + reason-phrase + CRLF

    * 200 is success, 400 is client request is wrong, 500 is server error 

    * reason-phrase like OK after status-code is just for humans to easily understand it better than the number status-code

    * HTTP header: header-field = field-name + ":" + OWS field-value OWS (OWS means allows space in between)

    * field-name can be caps on or off. There should **not** be a space between field-name and ":"

    * Message body can be HTML document, image, video, JSON, or basically anything byte can display

3. HTTP method
    * For naming URI, need to differentiate resources/concepts like members. Finding members by id is not resource but member itself is a resource. The method of resource will be taken care of by HTTP methods

    * GET - data that client wants to get from server is through *?query*

    * POST - data delivered through *message body*, It is for starting a new process, making new resource or changing resource

    * PUT is substitute resource and if there is no resource, make it (e.g. putting file in folder and if there is no such file, make it and if there is an existing file, new file substitutes 덮어버려 the old one). Diff between PUT and POST is that PUT client knows the resource location and sets the URI but for POST, client does not know. However, if there is a missing member detail like PUT id only instead of id and age, the resulting change deletes the age condition as well and only the id remains. So if certain features of resource need to be changed, PATCH is better.

    * PATCH is changing a part of resource (e.g. changing member's id). But some very few servers don't accept PATCH so in those cases, use the ultimate solution POST

    * DELETE is deleting a resource

    * Safe - resource doesn't change when it is called like GET, not POST. Doesn't consider overloading logs in server 

    * Idempotent - f(f(x)) = f(x) call once or 100 times the result is the same like GET, PUT , DELETE, not POST. When client wants DELETE but server gives TIMEOUT and is unable to give a response, can the client re-request it? Yes because it is idempotent. Doesn't consider external changes made (e.g. GET something but there is a PUT that changes that, GET will get that changed details)

    * Cacheable - Storing large data like images in browser cache. GET, HEAD normally used. POST, PATCH also can but caches require matching to specific keys and these 2 methods are hard to do that

    * Client sends data server through 2 main methods: 1) Query parameter (?query) with GET 2) Message bodies (POST,PUT,PATCH)

    * For static content, no need query parameter so just URL with GET works.

    * For non-static content, need query parameter. 

    * HTML Form generates HTTP message



