---
date: 2022-01-19 14:35:23
layout: post
title: MOOC.fi Java Programming I Part 4
subtitle: Fundamentals of Java
description: Fundamentals of Java
image: https://res.cloudinary.com/dm7h7e8xj/image/upload/v1559825145/theme16_o0seet.jpg
optimized_image: https://res.cloudinary.com/dm7h7e8xj/image/upload/c_scale,w_380/v1559825145/theme16_o0seet.jpg
category: Java
tags:
  - Java
  - MOOC.fi
author: Jeonghwan Lee
---

Part 4~

1. Introduction to object-oriented programming
    * A **class** defines the attributes of objects, i.e., the information related to them (instance variables) that specifies internal state of object, and their commands, i.e., their methods. The values of instance (i.e., object) variables define the internal state of an individual object, whereas methods define the functionality it offers.

    * A **method** is a piece of source code written inside a class that's been named and has the ability to be called. A method is always part of some class and is often used to modify the internal state of an object instantiated from a class.

    * An object is always instantiated by calling a method that created an object, i.e., a constructor by using the new keyword.

    * Each object created from the Person class has a name and an age. Variables defined inside a class are called **instance variables**, or object fields or object attributes.

    ```java
    public class Person {
        private String name;
        private int age;
    }
    ```

    * The keyword private means that the variables are "hidden" inside the object. This is known as **encapsulation**. "variableName: variableType" The minus sign before the variable name indicates that the variable is encapsulated (it has the keyword private). -name:String and -age:int in Person class

    * When defining constructor, it'd be convenient to pass values ​​to the variables of that object as it's being created. For example, when creating a new person object, it's useful to be able to provide it with a name. This is achieved by defining the method that creates the object, i.e., its constructor. The constructor is defined **after the instance variables**.

    ```java
    public class Person {
        private String name;
        private int age;

        //constructor sets the age of the object being created to 0, 
        // and the string passed to the constructor as a parameter as its name:
        public Person(String initialName) {
            this.age = 0;
            this.name = initialName;
        }

        //method is below constructor
        public void printPerson() {
            System.out.println(this.name + ", age " + this.age + " years");
    }
    }
    ```

    * The constructor's name is always the same as the class name.

    * The constructor is also provided, as a parameter, the name of the person object to be created. The parameter is enclosed in parentheses (). The parentheses that contain optional parameters are followed by curly brackets. In between these brackets is the source code that the program executes when the constructor is called (e.g., new Person ("Ada")).

    *  Constructor contains the expression this.age = 0. This expression sets the instance variable age of the newly created object (i.e., "this" object's age) to 0. The second expression this.name = initialName likewise assigns the string passed as a parameter to the instance variable name of the object created.

    * A method is written inside of the class beneath the constructor. The method name is preceded by public void, since the method is intended to be visible to the outside world (public), and it does not return a value (void).

    * The static modifier indicates that the method in question does not belong to an object and thus cannot be used to access any variables that belong to objects. So just public void. Going forward, methods will not include the static keyword if they're used to process information about objects created from a given class. If a method receives all the variables whose values ​​it uses as parameters, it can have a static modifier.

    * The method printPerson contains code that makes use of the instance variables name and age. Instance variables are referred to with the prefix **this**.

    * 

2. Objects in a list
    * ArrayList<Type> list = new ArrayList<>()

    * There are 2 types of variables in Java - value type (primitive) and reference type (reference type). Value-type variables such as int or double hold actual values. Reference-type variables such as ArrayList, in contrast, contain a reference to the location that contains the value(s) relating to that variable. Value-type variables can hold a very limited amount of information, whereas references can store a near limitless amount of it.

    * Once a list has been created, ArrayList assumes that all the variables contained in it are reference types. Java automatically converts an int variable into Integer when one is added to a list, and the same occurs when a variable is retrieved from a list. This means that even though a list is defined to contain Integer-type variables, variables of type int can also be added to it.

    * .add() takes the value to be added as a parameter and print the value at position zero

    * .remove() removes the value that is located at the index that's given as the integer parameter like remove(1)
    
    * .get() retrieves a value from a certain position

    * .size() returns the number of elements the list contains

    * .contains() checks the existence of a value in the list. The method receives the value to be searched as its parameter, and it returns a boolean type value (true or false)

    ```java
    ArrayList<String> teachers = new ArrayList<>();

    teachers.add("Simon");
    teachers.add("Samuel");
    teachers.add("Ann");
    teachers.add("Anna");

    for (int index = 0; index < teachers.size(); index++) {
        System.out.println(teachers.get(index));
    }
    // prints simon, sam, ann, anna

    //reverse
    int index = numbers.size() - 1;
    while (index >= 0) {
        int number = numbers.get(index);
        System.out.println(number);
        index = index - 1;
    }
    ```

    * for (TypeOfVariable nameOfVariable: nameOfList), where TypeOfVariable is the list's element type, and nameOfVariable is the variable that is used to store each value in the list as we go through it. e.g. for(int i:myList)

    * If the parameter given to remove is the same type as the values in the list, but not an integer, (integers are used to remove from a given index), it can be used to remove a value directly from the list like remove("hola")

    * If the list contains integers, you cannot remove a number value by giving an **int** type parameter to the remove method. This would remove the number from the index that the parameter indicates, instead of an element on the list that has the same value as the parameter. To remove an integer type value you can convert the parameter to **Integer** type; this is achieved by the valueOf method of the Integer class like list.remove(Integer.valueOf(15));

    * List can be used as a parameter to a method too, like variables. When the method is defined to take a list as a parameter, the type of the parameter is defined as the type of the list and the type of the values contained in that list.

    ```java
    public static void print(ArrayList<String> list) {
        for (String value: list) {
            System.out.println(value);
        }
    }
    ArrayList<String> strings = new ArrayList<>();
    print(strings)
    ```
    * chosen parameter in the method definition is not dependent on the list that is passed as parameter in the method call. In the program that calls print, the name of the list variable is string, but inside the method print the variable is called list — the name of the variable that stores the list could also be printables, for instance.

    * can also define multiple variables for a method. 

    ```java
    public static void printSmallerThan(ArrayList<Integer> numbers, int threshold) {
        for (int number: numbers) {
            if (number < threshold) {
                System.out.println(number);
            }
        }
    }

    ArrayList<Integer> list = new ArrayList<>();
    printSmallerThan(list, 3);
    ```

    * Method can return value, without void

    ```java
    public static double average(ArrayList<Integer> numbers) {
    if (numbers.size() == 0) {
        return -1.0;
    }

    int sum = 0;
    for (int number: numbers) {
        sum = sum + number;
    }

    return 1.0 * sum / numbers.size();
    }
    ```

3. Arrays
    * Size of the ArrayList is unlimited whereas array contains a limited amount of numbered spots (indices) for values. The length (or size) of an Array is the amount of these spots, i.e. how many values can you place in the Array. The values in an Array are called **elements**.

    * 1st way to create array is explicitly define the size upon creating. An array is declared by adding square brackets after the type of the elements it contains (typeofelements[]). A new Array is created by calling new followed by the type of the elements, square brackets and the number of the elements in the square brackets.

    ```java
    int[] numbers = new int[3];
    numbers[0] = 2;
    numbers[2] = 5;
    ```

    * 2nd and final way to create array. So apart from calling for new, we can also initialize an array with a block, that contains comma-separated values to be assigned in the array. This works for all the types:

    ```java
    String[] arrayOfStrings = {"Matti L.", "Matti P.", "Matti V."};
    double[] arrayOfFloatingpoints = {1.20, 3.14, 100.0, 0.6666666667};
    ```

    * Assigning a value to a specific spot of an Array works much like assigning a value in a normal variable, but in the Array you must specify the index, i.e. to which spot you want to assign the value. The index is specified in square brackets.

    * find the size of the array through the associated variable length. Note it is not method so .length() doesn't work

    * When you use array as a parameter of a method, the method receives a copy of the reference to the array.

4. Strings
    * Strings can't be compared with with the equals operator ==. Use .equals() method 

    * .split() method returns an array of the resulting sub-parts

    * .contains() method -> Strings have a contains-method, which tells if a string contains another string

    * .chartAt() gets character as specified index of string 

    * Splitting a string always produces an array of strings. So if the text is of fixed format, we can assume the data in a specific index to always be of the a specific type and can use Integer.valueOf() to convert string to number for further calculations like sum 

    * .length() method exists for strings (rmb .length is not a method for array) 

    * revisit last exercise PersonalDetails

    ```java
    import java.util.ArrayList;
    import java.util.Scanner;

    public class PersonalDetails {

        public static void main(String[] args) {
            Scanner scanner = new Scanner(System.in);
            String input = scanner.nextLine();
            String longestName ="";
            int sum=0;
            int count=0;
            while(true){
                if(input.equals("")){
                    break;
                }
                String[] parts = input.split(",");
                
                if(parts[0].length()>longestName.length()){
                    longestName=parts[0];
                }
                
                sum += Integer.valueOf(parts[1]);
                count++;
            }
            if (count > 0) {
                System.out.println("Longest name:" + longestName) ;
                System.out.println("Age average: " + (1.0 * sum / count));
            } else {
                System.out.println("No input.");
        }
        }
    }
    ```









